# Logging

The interpreter provides a logging facility to trace the RPG program execution.
To enable the log functionality it is required to specify the configuration file using the **-lc** or  **--log-configuration** on the runner command line, the muterunner command line or for any other tool.

The logging permits to monitor the interpreter behaviour at the runtime. The logging messages are is subdivided in channels, each one designed to capture a specific aspect of the interpreter. 

The output consists of a set of data records, with a fixed header segment with common data and a variable data segment specific for each channel. 

The values of the record are separated by a character specified in the configuration file. This permits to easily process the resulting logs as CSV files or using comman line tools such as cut.

The available channels are:

* **Data:** monitors the accesses to the variables.
* **Expression:** traces the expressions encountered during the program execution.
* **Statement:**  provides information about the statements executed.
* **Loop:** captures the loop execution including the number of iterations.
* **Performance:** measures the execution time.
* **Parsing:** measures parsing phase time.
* **Resolution:** provides information about the process to identify the routines or programs to invoke. 
* **Error:** provides information about error event occurred during the whole cycle of program interpretation.
* **Analytics** provides information about higher level data collected during the whole cycle of program interpretation.

## How it works

The log system is modeled on the concept of *channels* as previously mentioned. Each channel is defined in the `LogChannel` enum as a variant. In order to handle logs for a specific channel a specialization of the abstract class `LogHandler` must be implemented and provided by the `LogHandlerFactory`.

`LogHandler`s are not strictly bound to channels. This means that more handlers can be defined to serve more specific needs if needed (for example logging debug information). Handlers defined with this mechanism can then be attached to the `SystemInterface` manually.

Each log line is fired by rendering a `LazyLogEntry`.
These are data classes that contain:
- A `LogEntry` which provides information about the source of the log and it's nature (`scope` and `action`)
- A `renderContent` function

## Sample

```shell script
java -jar /home/<user>/git-projects/jariko/rpgJavaInterpreter-core/build/libs/rpgJavaInterpreter-core-all.jar -lc /home/<user>/jariko_rpg/logging.config /home/<user>/jariko_rpg/X1_X21_03C.rpgle
```
* _the rpgJavaIntepreter-core-all.jar required can be generated by **./gradlew fatJar** command, see [the development guide](development.md#creating-a-jar-with-all-dependencies-to-run-some-examples)_
* _it could be necessary to run above 'java -jar...' command directly from .rpgle container directory, or tell the interpreter the [Program Search Directories](development.md#program-search-directories) via the the -psd start opition_

You can enable logging also in case of you want switch on the "mutes" interpretation.
```shell script
java -jar /home/<user>/git-projects/jariko/rpgJavaInterpreter-core/build/libs/rpgJavaInterpreter-core-mute-all.jar -lc /home/<user>/jariko_rpg/logging.config /home/<user>/jariko_rpg/X1_X21_03C.rpgle
```
* _the rpgJavaInterpreter-core-mute-all.jar required can be generated by **./gradlew fatMuteJar** command, see [the development guide](development.md#creating-a-jar-with-all-dependencies-to-run-some-examples)_

## Configuration File
The logging configuration file is a plain text file containing the parameters to enable/disable the channels and set the output device. 

```
#
#  Logging configuration file
#

logger.data.separator =  \t
logger.date.pattern = HH:mm:ss.SSS

logger.file.path = /var/log/smeup-rpg
logger.file.name = log.log

data.level = all
data.output = console

loop.level = all
loop.output = console

expression.level = all
expression.output = console

statement.level = all
statement.output = file

performance.level = all
performance.output = console

resolution.level = off
resolution.output = console

parsing.level = off
parsing.output = console

error.level = off
error.output = console

```

The value specified in **logger.data.separator** is the character used to 
separate the values within a record. 

Each record has contains a timestamp in the **logger.date.pattern** allows
to specify the format of the data. 

The logging allows to redirect the output to the console or to file. 
In case of file the parameters **logger.file.path** and **logger.file.name** 
allow to set the path and the filename of the log file. 

The channel configuration consist of two values: **level** and **output**. 

* The **level** allows to enable or disable the channel, the possible values are
**all** and **off**.

* The **output** parameter specifies where the log will be redirected, in case is set
to **console**, the logging information are written on the screen otherwise if 
set ot **file** the data will be appended to the file specified by **logger.file.path** 
and **logger.file.name**. 

## Passing the configuration without a file

If you don't want to pass the configuration to the logging system using a file, you could use the ```consoleLoggingConfiguration``` or the ```fileLoggingConfiguration``` fun combined with the `LogChannel` enum.
For example:
```
val si = JavaSystemInterface(consoleLoggingConfiguration(LogChannel.EXPRESSION, LogChannel.PERFORMANCE))
```   
or
```
val si = JavaSystemInterface(fileLoggingConfiguration(File("/home/pippo", "example.log"), LogChannel.EXPRESSION, LogChannel.PERFORMANCE))
```   

## Log file format

Each log record consists of a fixed header containing the common data and a 
variable data segment which depends on the channel.


```
<TIMESTAMP><S><CHANNEL><S><PROGRAM><S><LINE><S><ACTION><S><CHANNEL SPECIFIC>
+------------------ header ------------------------------+----- data ------+
```     

The header contains the following data:

* **TIMESTAMP** timestamp of the record
* **PROGRAM** name of the program, if available
* **LINE** the line of code, if available, or lines number of source code
* **CHANNEL** a mnemonic name of the channel 

The **S** represent the separator character specified in the configuration.

## Data Channel DATA
The data channel monitors the accesses to the variables during the program execution.  

```
14:53:47.263 DATA   MUTE10_10   16   ASSIGN  $V = 1  was: 0
+------------ header ---------------+-------+--- data ----+
```     
The log record collects the initial value zero in this case and the new value
assigned by a statement. In the example above the value of variable V has an
initial value of 0 (zero) and assume the value of 1.


## Statement Channel STMT
The statement channel captures information about the statement executed.  

```
15:04:57.031 STMT   MUTE10_10    47    EXEC   EVAL   $TIMMS = $TIMMS / 1000 
+-------------- header ---------------+------+-------- statement ---------+
```     

In the example above the record contains the statement executed `EVAL $TIMMS = $TIMMS / 1000`.

Some statements might also emit proper and more specific information in the data section of the log entry.

The statement channel also tracks the start and the end of a
program or subroutine. 

```
15:16:28.859    STMT	MUTE10_10		 START	INTERPRETATION
15:04:57.041    STMT    MUTE10_10        END    INTERPRETATION
+-------------- header ---------------+--------+---- stmt ----+
```

## Expression Channel EXPR
The expression channel collect all the expressions encountered during the program execution.

```
15:59:20.546 EXPR   MULANGTC10    12    EVAL    C10_P2 = 1    true
+-------------------- header ----------------+---- expr ----+----+
```


## Loop Channel LOOP
The loop channel captures the execution of loops.
Two log records are created, the first when the loop starts and second
when the loop exits. The end loop record include the number of cycles 
actually executed.

```
10:01:16.243 LOOP   MUTE10_10    39    START   DO 
10:01:16.631 LOOP   MUTE10_10    39    END     DO  100000
+--------------- header -------------+--- loop ---+------+
```

Please note that statements like LEAVE may affect the number of cycles
actually executed.

## Performance Channel PERF
The performance channel measures the execution time of statements. 
The log records are generated at the end of statements block, measuring the
time in microseconds.

```
15:51:55.838 PERF   MULANGTC10      7       PLIST   elapsed 8.875us
15:51:55.840 PERF   MULANGTC10      13      EVAL    elapsed 566us
15:51:55.840 PERF   MULANGTC10      14      EVAL    elapsed 35.084us
+---------------- header -----------------+--------+----- perf ----+
```

## Parsing Channel PARS
The parsing channel measures the parsing time needed to build AST.
The log records related to the end of a parsing phase provide also the elapsed time information.

```
12:03:32.724 PARS   MUTE10_10               START   RPGLOAD
12:03:32.730 PARS   MUTE10_10       56      END     RPGLOAD         elapsed 2936us
12:03:32.730 PARS   MUTE10_10               START   LEXER
12:03:32.778 PARS   MUTE10_10               END     LEXER           elapsed 47015us
12:03:32.778 PARS   MUTE10_10               START   PARSER
12:03:32.883 PARS   MUTE10_10               END     PARSER          elapsed 104924us
12:03:32.883 PARS   MUTE10_10               START   RCONTEXT
12:03:33.118 PARS   MUTE10_10               END     RCONTEXT        elapsed 234507us
12:03:33.118 PARS   MUTE10_10               START   CHKPTREE
12:03:33.120 PARS   MUTE10_10               END     CHKPTREE        elapsed 1681us
12:03:33.121 PARS   MUTE10_10               START   AST
12:03:33.306 PARS   MUTE10_10               END     AST             elapsed 185138us
+--------------- header ----------------+---------+---- parse ----+----- time -----+
```


## Resolution Channel RESL
The resolution channel provides information about the action taken in order
to resolve a program. When the interpreter starts, the RESL channel logs the list
of strategies used to locate a RPG/Java program.

```
15:47:40.824 RESL	T10_A60_P02	8	CALL	"MULANGTC10"
+------------ header -------------+---- resolution ----+
```

## Analytics Channel ANALYTICS
The analytics channel provides processed collected during the whole execution cycle. Information yield by this channel are derived by a LoggingContext where logging metadata are stored.

Statement time analytics provide information about which statements were called during the program execution, how much time was spent totally to execute that statement and how many times each one was hit.

```
12:25:35.612 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    DISPLAY 204us   1
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    EXSR    450369us        1
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    SET     146us   1
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    TIME    3026us  2
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    DO      441230us        1
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    EVAL    3857us  2
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    ZADD    204600us        200000
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        STMT TIME    SUBDUR  601us   1
+------------- header ------------+--------+-------------------+----- analytics ------+
```

Symbol table analytics provide the same information of the statement analytics but referred to symbol table actions rather than statement execution.
```
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        SYMTBL TIME    INIT    21429us    1
12:25:35.613 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        SYMTBL TIME    LOAD    131us      1
+------------- header ------------+--------+------------------+-- analytics --+
```

There are also other analytics which provide their own informational data. Here are some examples:
```
12:25:35.615 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        EXPR TIME       56195us    1300104
12:25:35.615 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        LOG TIME        56177us    1300109
12:25:35.615 ANALYTICS    MUTE10_10        PROGRAM TIME    1220526us
+------------- header ------------+--------+---------------+--- analytics --+
```

## Error Channel ERR
The error channel catches the error events (instances of `com.smeup.rpgparser.execution.ErrorEvent`).
These events are particularly meaningful during the program syntax checking, below we can see an example.
As you can see, the `ErrorEvent` is shown through its string representation.
```
10:05:03.612 ERR    T10_A60_P02     4       ErrorEvent(error=java.lang.IllegalStateException: token recognition error at: 'Error', errorEventSource=Parser, absoluteLine=4, sourceReference=SourceReference(sourceReferenceType=Program, sourceId=T10_A60_P02, relativeLine=4, position=Position(start=Line 4, Column 5, end=Line 4, Column 5)), fragment=     Error)
```

For further information about the `ErrorEvent` see the kotlin-doc in [Configuration.kt](../rpgJavaInterpreter-core/src/main/kotlin/com/smeup/rpgparser/execution/Configuration.kt)

